---
layout: post
title: MD5 Collision Attack
excerpt: MD5 is a type of one-way hash function. A one-way hash function is a cryptographic function that takes an input and generates a fixed-size output. When a one-way hash function produces the same hash output for different inputs, this is known as a collision. A good one-way hash function must be collision-resistant. The collision-resistance property ensures that it is computationally infeasible to find two inputs that produce the same hash output. If a hash function lacks collision resistance, it becomes vulnerable to collision attacks such as birthday attacks, where an attacker tries to find two inputs that produce the same hash value.
categories: [crypto, md5]
---

MD5 is a type of one-way hash function.

A one-way hash function is a cryptographic function that takes an input and generates a fixed-size output. There are several properties of a one-way hash function. Some of these include:

- getting the original input from the hash value must be computationally infeasible.

- changing a single character in the input should result in a completely different hash value.

- it should have a negligible probability of producing the same hash output for different inputs

When a one-way hash function produces the same hash output for different inputs, this is known as a collision. A good one-way hash function must be collision-resistant. The collision-resistance property ensures that it is computationally infeasible to find two inputs that produce the same hash output. If a hash function lacks collision resistance, it becomes vulnerable to collision attacks such as birthday attacks, where an attacker tries to find two inputs that produce the same hash value.

Collision attacks can be achieved through various techniques, such as brute force searching, exploiting weaknesses or vulnerabilities in the hash function, or using advanced mathematical algorithms.

One-way hash functions are used in password storage, data verification, digital signatures, and data integrity checks.

<details>
<summary><b>SeedLabs: MD5 Collision Attack Lab</b></summary>
<div markdown="1">

[MD5 Collision Attack Lab](https://seedsecuritylabs.org/Labs_20.04/Files/Crypto_MD5_Collision/Crypto_MD5_Collision.pdf)

___
</div></details>


### Generating Two Different Files with the Same MD5 Hash

This lab section deals with generating two different files with the same MD5 hash values. To achieve this, the beginning parts of both files need to be the same; which means they have to share the same prefix. A prefix refers to a specific set of bytes that are added to the beginning of data before it is hashed.

The `md5collgen` program allows us to provide a prefix file with any arbitrary content.

```python
#!/usr/bin/env python3

with open("prefix.txt", "w") as file:
    file.write("A" * 64)
```

```bash
$ md5collgen -p prefix.txt -o out1.bin out2.bin
```

**image**

When I check whether the out1.bin and out2.bin files are distinct using the diff command, the result is that out1.bin and out2.bin differ.

**image**

However, when I use the md5sum command to check the MD5 hash of out1.bin and out2.bin, the result is that the hash values of out1.bin and out2.bin are the same.

**image**

Since the output of md5collgen: out1.bin and out2.bin are binary files, we need to use a hex editor to view and edit them. When I view the binary files with a hex editor, I can see the characters I supplied in the prefix file.

Inspecting the binary files, I noticed the following:

- if the length of your prefix file is not a multiple of 64, md5collgen makes up for the length by filling the block with zeros.

**image**

- whereas if the prefix file is exactly 64 bytes, there is no zero padding.

**image**

- the data generated by md5collgen is not completely different for the out1.bin and out2.bin output files?


<br>

### Understanding MD5’s Property

This lab section deals with trying to understand some of the properties of the MD5 algorithm. These properties include:
- MD5 divides the input data into blocks of 64 bytes
- it then computes the hash iteratively on these blocks via a compression function. This compression function takes a 64-byte data block and the outcome of the previous iteration as input.
- the output of the compression function is a 128-bit Intermediate Hash Value (IHV).
- the IHV for the first iteration is a fixed predetermined value
- the IHV for the last iteration becomes the final hash value of the data.

Based on the above, given two inputs M and N, if MD5(M) = MD5(N), then for any input T, MD5(M || T) = MD5(N || T), where || represents concatenation.

What this simply means is that if inputs M and N have the same hash, should I add the same suffix T to them, their outputs will have the same hash value. To demonstrate this, I will concatenate the `ls` binary to out1.bin and out2.bin respectively, and calculate the hash value of their outputs.

```bash
cat out1.bin /usr/bin/ls > out3.bin
cat out2.bin /usr/bin/ls > out4.bin
md5sum out3.bin out4.bin
```

from the results in the screenshot below, we can see that the outputs produce the same hash value.

**image**


<br>

###  Generating Two Executable Files with the Same MD5 Hash

This lab section deals with creating two different versions of a program given below, such that the contents of their "xyz" arrays are different, but the hash values of the executables are the same.

```c
#include <stdio.h>

unsigned char xyz[200] = {
  /* The actual contents of this array are up to you */
};

int main()
{
  int i;
  for (i=0; i<200; i++){
    printf("%x", xyz[i]);
  }
  printf("\n");
}
```

I can go about this in two ways:
- working at the source code level, i.e., generating two versions of the above C program, such that after compilation, their corresponding executable files have the same MD5 hash value.
- working at the binary level, i.e., putting some arbitrary values in the "xyz" array, compiling the code to binary, and using a hex editor tool to modify the content of the "xyz" array.

In order to find where the contents of the array are stored in the binary, I fill the array with "A"s (0x41) so I can easily find them in the binary. I write a Python program that will generate 200 'A's formatted for easy copy to the c code.

```python
#!/usr/bin/env python3

#array = input("Type in the characters you want to transform: ")
array = "A" * 200

result = bytes.hex(array.encode())
a = 0; b = 0

for _ in result[::2]:
    print (f"0x{result[a:a+2]}, ", end="")
    a += 2
    b += 1
    # Make each output 10 characters per line
    if b % 10 == 0:
        print()    
print()
```

When I compile the c code and inspect the binary in a hex editor, I am able to identify the array.

**image**

From inside the array, I can divide the executable file into three parts:
- a prefix (The length of the prefix needs to be multiple 0f 64 bytes)
- a 128-byte region
- a suffix. 


the array starts from 12320 to 12519. since the array has to be a part of the prefix, I need to look for a number within the array that is a multiple of 64. I ended up with 12352.

```bash
$ head -c 12352 md5col > prefix
```

the 128-byte region will be generated by md5collgen

```bash
$ md5collgen -p prefix -o out1.bin out2.bin
```

the suffix will start from 12352 + 128 = 12480.

```bash
$ tail -c +12480 md5col > suffix
```




We can run md5collgen on the prefix to generate two outputs that have the same MD5 hash value.
Let us use P and Q to represent the second part (each having 128 bytes) of these outputs (i.e., the part after
the prefix). Therefore, we have the following:



